D. Estes McKnight\
26 April 2019

# *Symphony of the Night* and Redefining *Castlevania*

*Castlevania: Symphony of the Night* fundamentally altered the
trajectory of one of the most popular video game franchises (Marlowe),
introducing new concepts to the series based on hardware and industry
trends and in the name of improving accessibility and replayability
(Igarashi). In the process, it brings together concepts lacking from the
previous games in the series into a characteristic style, giving rise to
the Metroidvania genre ("Metroidvania (Concept)"). It does this by
breaking from the traditional stage-based system in favor of a more
exploration-based system, offering multiple ways for players to approach
the level, and adding RPG elements such as equipment and level-ups; all
of these features are carried over into later games in the series.

In *Symphony of the Night*, players take control of Alucard, the son of
Dracula, as he attempts to unravel why *Castlevania*, the eponymous
castle of the series and Dracula's residency, has reappeared. Gameplay
is arguably that of an action-platformer, with players moving in a 2-D
plane from ground level, but the style of *Symphony of the Night* has
since become influential enough that it's also said to be part of its
own Metroidvania genre, which focuses on 2-D exploratory platforming
with upgrades that offer access to new areas. Unlike prior *Castlevania*
entries, *Symphony* incorporates RPG elements such as an
experience/level system, an inventory of usable items, player stats, and
equipment (beyond that of the series' traditional sub-weapons).
Additionally, in *Symphony*, the stages are all part of a larger world
map, and areas can be entered in different orders.

*Symphony* was directed by Toru Hagihara and Koji Igarashi under
Konami's Konami Entertainment Tokyo (TYO) division. The TYO division was
not the development studio traditionally responsible for *Castlevania*
games- typically, the games were developed by the Kobe division
(Igarashi 4:19; "Aria of Sorrow --2003 Developer Interview"). As such,
the developers figured they "were allowed free rein to do pretty much
whatever \[they\] wanted" (Parkin). The result was transformative to the
series; the next original 2D games in the series (*Circle of the Moon,
Harmony of Dissonance, Aria of Sorrow, Dawn of Sorrow, Portrait of
Ruin,* and *Order of Ecclesia*) all featured elements introduced by the
game, including equipment, level-ups, a focus on exploration, and, until
*Portrait of Ruin*, a single, cohesive castle.

One of the primary changes the developers wished to make to the game was
to make the game longer. New technological advances made this easier
than ever; the transition to CD-ROMs allowed, like for *Rondo*, the
storage of many more textures and higher-quality music than in some of
the previous games in the series, and the game is instead constricted by
loading times (helped in part by transition "hallways" between sections
of the game's castle). This extra memory, coupled with some very
enthusiastic developers (in the words of Igarashi, "that was the kind of
team it was, devoting a lot of attention to side details... they devoted
a lot of attention to stuff that didn't matter" and "all the coders and
so on wanted to \[include\] fun stuff ("'Devs Play' Special --
*Castlevania*: Symphony of the Night" 27:53 and 1:44:38)) also allowed
for expansive and detailed environments to a level that previous games
in the series couldn't have reached. The decision to add in a "reverse
castle" effectively doubled the amount of playable game while using
minimal extra memory and development time, too, similar to *A Link to
the Past*'s usage of the "Dark World."

More pointedly, in the process of making the game longer, the developers
also changed the game's layout from a stage-based system, as almost all
previous *Castlevania* games had implemented (*Castlevania II: Simon's
Quest* being a notable exception), to a contiguous map, ├á la Metroid;
*Super Metroid* is explicitly mentioned by the developers as an
influence in their decision to do this (McFerran). They also hid secrets
(to a greater extent than the wall meat of previous games, somewhat akin
to those in *Rondo*) and locked certain areas behind power-up barriers,
also possibly inspired by *Super Metroid*. Because of this, levels no
longer were one-off places to be cleared and finished with but are
instead places with potential secrets yet to be revealed. Combined with
the extravagant devotion to detail and numerous special touches
mentioned previously, on top of the typical *Castlevania* fun of
clearing out enemies and making it past sections of the game comes an
additional sense of discovery. It's certainly worth noting that *Rondo*
had this to some extent with its hidden and branching paths and
occasional secrets, but *Symphony* builds on this by providing more of
them, a map completion task, and a bestiary. In fact, the pursuit of
creating an exploration-based game was one of the driving factors in
*Symphony's* team developing it as a 2-D game, despite the hardware
being well-suited to 3-D elements (Igarashi 22:16).

*Symphony of the Night* is also the first *Castlevania* to fully embrace
RPG elements (although *Castlevania II*: *Simon's Quest* does to a more
limited extent), which improve replayability in several ways. By
introducing player equipment and randomizing enemy drops, visiting all
of the castle's nooks and crannies becomes a bit of a treasure hunt, and
re-defeating enemies provides chances to obtain previously-unobtained
loot, providing additional inherent meaning to defeating enemies even in
the events where they don't drop items ("Games as Systems of
Uncertainty"). In addition, the experience and leveling systems decrease
the tediousness of backtracking through already-encountered areas by
virtue of enemies being proportionally weaker, and thus less of a hassle
to deal with. It also offers incentives to replay areas of the map, as
even low-leveled enemies count toward Alucard's next level. Randomized
drops also help ensure that no two playthroughs of the game are quite
the same in a different manner than playing through the game with
different characters does for other *Castlevania* games; this
randomization can, therefore, help keep player interest through multiple
playthroughs, even with the same character (Harris).

These RPG elements improve accessibility, as well. Players seeking a
challenge can try to complete the game with minimal (or even
stat-debuffing) equipment, while players having trouble with the game
can level up until they're ready to face a given boss or section. In
fact, the developers' goal in doing this was to make it so that "even
the users who were not good at playing action games would be able to
clear the game if \[the game\] adopted \[experience points and levels\]"
(McFerran). The different equipment and attacks the game supports also
means that fights can be approached in ways that suit players more
(i.e., a player can tentatively tank a boss through potions and mana
prisms). In the context of Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi's flow theory, this
allows players to play right up until the skill level they're
comfortable with through bypassing/equipping items and increasing/not
increasing levels, allowing (along with the feedback of experience gain
and item collection, goals of defeating enemies, and aural and visual
feedback) them to enter a flow state (Sherry 332).

Lastly, although present in previous *Castlevania* games, Symphony of
the Night arguably offers branching paths and different ways of
approaching levels to a greater extent than any *Castlevania* game
barring *Castlevania III: Dracula's Curse* and potentially *Rondo of
Blood*. Unlike *Castlevania III*, however, players can choose to back
out of any area at any given time. The developers wished to make the
game challenging to experienced players, but accessible for new players.
However, a common pitfall for the series in accomplishing this was that
increasing the difficulty of the levels in order to cater to more adept
fans alienates less skillful players or players new to the series
(Igarashi 5:46). Whereas in *Castlevania III*, once players chose a
partner, they were largely stuck with them and the route, in *Symphony
of the Night* players can decide to re-route themselves to less- or
more- difficult paths, helping to solve the skill level issue. The
offering of branching paths itself improves replayability as well, as in
different play-throughs players can opt to pursue different portions of
the castle first, again like *Super Metroid*.

In *Symphony of the Night,* many elements were introduced to the series,
including RPG elements, increased exploratory motivation, and different
ways of approaching the game and game's areas that altered the series'
formula. These changes have propagated onwards to future *Castlevania*
games, making it pivotal in *Castlevania*'s history. In spawning the
Metroidvania genre, *Symphony's* developers succeeded in their goal of
increasing accessibility and replayability by fusing successful concepts
from other games with the *Castlevania* series.

## Works Cited

"Aria of Sorrow -- 2003 Developer Interview". Translated and hosted by
*shmuplations.com*, originally published in *Nintendo Dream.* \~Summer
2003. <http://shmuplations.com/ariaofsorrow/>.

"Games as Systems of Uncertainty." *Rules of Play: Game Design
Fundamentals*, by Katie Salen and Eric Zimmerman. The MIT Press. 2010,
pp. 180. *Amazon Kindle*.

Harris, John. "Analysis: Purposes for Randomization in Game Design."
*Gamasutra.com*, 18 May 2010,
[www.gamasutra.com/view/news/28495/Analysis_Purposes_for_Randomization_in_Game_Design.php](http://www.gamasutra.com/view/news/28495/Analysis_Purposes_for_Randomization_in_Game_Design.php).

Igarashi, Koji. "There and Back Again: Koji Igarashi\'s Metroidvania
Tale (English translation)". *YouTube.com*. Uploaded by GDC. 8 April
2016. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gLyjAWYK2Kg>.

Marlowe, Chris. "Project 51 to Explore *Castlevania* Storyline".
*GameDaily.com.* 26 April 2019. Archived at
[https://web.archive.org/web/20090116022409/http://www.gamedaily.com/articles/features/project-51-to-explore-*Castlevania*-storyline/69268/?biz=1](https://web.archive.org/web/20090116022409/http://www.gamedaily.com/articles/features/project-51-to-explore-castlevania-storyline/69268/?biz=1).

McFerran, Damien. "The Making Of *Castlevania*: Symphony of the Night".
*PushSquare.com*, originally published in *Retro Gamer*. 3 September
2012.
[http://www.pushsquare.com/news/2012/09/feature_the_making_of\_*Castlevania*\_symphony_of_the_night](http://www.pushsquare.com/news/2012/09/feature_the_making_of_castlevania_symphony_of_the_night).

"Metroidvania (Concept)." Giant Bomb, Giant Bomb,
[www.giantbomb.com/metroidvania/3015-2440/](http://www.giantbomb.com/metroidvania/3015-2440/).

Parkin, Simon. "Unfinished Symphony: *Castlevania*'s Keeper Speaks".
*Eurogamer.net*. 4 September 2014.
[https://www.eurogamer.net/articles/2014-04-03-unfinished-symphony-*Castlevania*s-keeper-speaks](https://www.eurogamer.net/articles/2014-04-03-unfinished-symphony-castlevanias-keeper-speaks).

Schmierbach, Mike, et al. "No One Likes to Lose: The Effect of Game
Difficulty on Competency, Flow, and Enjoyment ." *Journal of Media
Psychology* vol. 26 no. 3. 2014. pp. 105--110. ProQuest,
doi:10.1027/1864-1105/a000120.

Sherry, J. L. "Flow and Media Enjoyment." *Communication Theory* vol. 14
no. 4. 2004. pp. 328--347. Wiley Online Library,
doi:10.1093/ct/14.4.328.

"Symphony of the Night -- 1997 Developer Interview". Translated and
hosted by *shmuplations.com,* originally featured in *NTT-PUB Official
Guide* for *Akumajou Dracula X: Gekka no Yasoukyoku.* 1997.
<http://shmuplations.com/symphony/>
